---
title: Brexit
---

**Brexit**

A prescient reminder of the place of mathematics in the public sphere occurred in the run-up to the 2016 Brexit referendum. A small, but alarming, fiasco arose over a Treasury report which sought to predict the impact of various trade regimes on the British economy. The forecasting was based on the widely-regarded gravity model of international trade, for which much mathematical justification exists in the economics literature. In its most basic form, it works by assuming the quantity of international trade between countries has some power-law dependence on the distance between them, and the relevant coefficients are then estimated. The Treasury report uses one of a number of popular models to extend this paradigm, by seeking a model expressing trade volume as the product of relevant quantities each raised to a certain power. (This may be compared to the common use of the Cobb-Douglas production function in microeconomics, in which a similar product model is used with little theoretical basis, and which has been widely disparaged.  As with normal distributions, the assumption that economic quantities follow these power law models is both pervasive and not well supported by the data – again, one imagines that these models are being used more out of computational ease rather than theoretical justification.)  The mathematics, when all is said and done, was not even especially complicated, essentially being a matter of several-factor regression analysis.


While there are sensible criticisms of the gravity model, the comments that resulted were rather alarming. It is important to bear in mind that the essential results of the analysis were presented early in the report, clearly bullet-pointed, and that the mathematical details were only included for clarity in an appendix. Consider the following quote from Conservative MP Tom Pursglove, quoted in a *Daily Express* article titled *NONSENSE!: George Osborne's Brexit Sums Add Up To 'Gobbledegook'*: "This looks like complete gobbledegook. Few voters will make head or tail of what it’s all about. Officials may use baffling formulas to try to prove whatever they like but nobody is really going to understand what they are on about.” Other concerning articles include the *Daily Mirror* article *George Osborne showed the maths behind his Brexit report and we're all massively confused*, which mocks the use of such complicated concepts as 'dummy variables' and 'econometric issues'. The comments on the article are also a sight to behold, including one which describes George Osborne as "Britain's answer to Rain man (sic)" and a description of the report as "200 pages full of government propaganda including equations that baffle everyone... it's pitiful". Perhaps summarising the attitude of the readership is the comment that "\[the government]" using all of these 'maths skills' and big words that normal people won't understand just means that people hate the government even more. Why can't they just speak plain English?"

To note that we have reached a point where the use of mathematics is not just ignored, but is used to actively discredit research, is absurd and frankly terrifying. Yet the sad thing, of course, is that he is largely correct – though it was hardly as if the report led with the formulae (and frankly they were not *that* mathematical in the first place). When mathematics enters politics, as happens often in finance, one must be careful – the usual rules of academia no longer apply. Mathematicians would often do well to remember that people will always have an antipathy towards that which they do not understand; equally, they must take care to avoid their own political views influencing their evaluation of mathematical outcomes in work such as this. 

There is a tendency among the mathematically inclined to assume that, because *they* know mathematical arguments make perfect sense, everyone else must of necessity agree with them. Yet this is impossibly far from the case. There is strong current of antipathy in much mainstream media that sees mathematics as something to be mocked as impenetrable, and there is no reason to believe that it will go away.  

When working in financial modelling and forecasting, mathematicians must remain aware that their findings are likely to be reported in popular media, potentially rather extensively. Aside from the clear ethical concern that their decisions may then directly impact the lives of millions, they must also bear in mind that when discussing mathematically-derived results, there is an overwhelming necessity to communicate it in a manner accessible to the layman – generally comprehensible without being condescending. It is, I suppose, not a manner of speech to which many mathematicians are well-accustomed, but it is increasingly essential.
