---
title: Pricing
---
**Pricing**
Taking the continuous limit of the binomial model, one obtains a formula (and in another manner can derive an associated equation) which applies when more 'realistic', time-continuous assumptions hold. This equation sometimes said to have brought about the crisis, the Black-Scholes equation, was heavily relied upon by traders around the time, in various calamitous ways. An equation, after all, is only as intelligent as the person using it, and it appears many financial firms were using Black-Scholes in a near-moronic manner. The original 1973 paper by Black and Scholes clearly states seven ideal conditions which must hold if the equation is to be applicable, which are frequently not satisfied in practice. Black and Scholes, effectively the mathematicians behind it all, were perfectly aware of the difficulties in applying their equation. But they did not realise the extent to which their equation would be used in inappropriate situations – despite creating a concept they no doubt thought was theoretically useful, they indirectly abetted in the destabilisation of the entire Western financial system.

While Black-Scholes is in some sense theoretically sound, the Gaussian copula model often used in conjunction with it was always built on much shakier ground. Used heavily in collateralised debt obligation modelling, it was originally used on the understanding that it in some sense 'maximises entropy'. However, when applied to real financial data, it has almost never been seen to be a very effective model – essentially, the tails of the real data are much heavier than the prediction of the Gaussian copula.

The assumption of normality recurs in financial mathematics, presumably because it has many convenient properties and is at least somewhat 'physical' as a distribution. Unfortunately for financial mathematicians, in many key cases there is little empirical evidence for this normal behaviour; indeed, Benoit Mandelbrot (of all people) identified as early as 1963 that the distributions of price changes are much too 'peaked' to be normal, and instead identifies them as following a Levy distribution. This follows the probability density function 

$$f(x) = \sqrt{c/2\pi}\dfrac{\exp({{-\dfrac{c}{2(x-\mu)}}})}{(x-\mu)^{3/2}}$$

for a real scale parameter $$c$$ and location parameter $$\mu$$ (note that, despite using the variable $$\mu$$, the Levy distribution in fact lacks a finite mean). This is fat-tailed, in that it drops off similarly to $$(x-\mu)^{-3/2}$$ towards infinity.  Notably, this distribution, as with the normal distribution, is 'stable': add together several variables following Levy distributions, and their sum also follows a Levy distribution.

The problem, however, is that the Levy distribution has infinite standard deviation, which means that models predicated on the use of the normal distribution (of finite standard deviation) cannot easily be altered to use it instead. One wonders how much of the criticism, however, is really just standard human psychology, an unwillingness to leave behind ideas that one is used to. To quote one of the fathers of modern statistics, Ronald Fisher: "The statistician cannot evade the responsibility for understanding the process he applies or recommends." 

Mandelbrot's studies led into masses of research over the latter half of the twentieth century. Lo and MacKinley (1988) used his ideas to destroy the once-common notion that asset prices follow random walks, noting much subtler correlations that  must be satisfied by any model purporting to explain it. In their book *An Introduction to Econophysics* – based on the intriguing conceit that financial markets can often be modelled in direct analogy with physical processes – Mantegna and Stanley observe an overlap between the Gaussian and Levy regimes around Levy-like distributions that both model financial variations well and have a finite standard deviation, making them more tractable for practical use. 

Of course, the deeper one gets into these papers, the more assumptions (usually) are made. While developments as above are constantly being made as to make models more closely attached to empirical evidence, many are rooted in the so-called 'efficient-market hypothesis', which essentially assumes that the market price of financial assets immediately changes to reflect all available information about the asset and its relation to the wider economy. Heavily advocated by Malkiel and Fama (1970), it comes in three principal branches: the *weak* form, in which markets only adapt to reflect historical prices; the *semi-strong* form, in which markets adapt to reflect all *public* data; and the *strong* form, in which markets adapt to reflect all information, including insider knowledge, private records, and suchlike. Any one of these forms of the hypothesis is is immensely difficult to test; the paradigm as a whole has been roundly criticised on a theoretical basis. Mathematicians – or indeed mathematically-trained economists – must of course be wary in applying such assumptions just for theoretical ease when the assumption's accuracy of reality is not clear.

It is clear, of course, that the use of the Black-Scholes equation was not the sole causative agent of the events of 2007-08 and beyond. To quote Professor Ian Stewart, "Black-Scholes may have contributed to the crash, but only because it was abused. In any case, the equation was just one ingredient in a rich stew of financial irresponsibility, political ineptitude, perverse incentives and lax regulation." Indeed, given that Black, Scholes and Merton made the assumptions behind their model clear in their initial paper, one wonders whether any blame can really be ascribed to them at all. To recapitulate, the principal ethical issue lies with the use of the formula, rather than its derivation.

The Black-Scholes formula, given its assumptions, is as steadfastly true as Pythagoras' theorem. It is here that the general attitude that mathematics is discovered rather than created has a great impact: 'discovering' something, with the implication that it was always there in the first place, exists in a rather distinct ethical space from 'creating' something, in which case some causative contribution to the process of existence is ascribed to the mathematician concerned. 
