---
title: Recessions
---

*Modelling recessions*

Modelling recessions is an immensely difficult task; predicting them is yet harder. An unimaginable number of variables, combined with a small sample size on the macro scale, combine to make models both difficult to construct and difficult to test. Nevertheless, people have certainly tried, with various levels of mathematical sophistication. A 2014 review by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York discusses fairly raw statistical techniques which have been used to analyse which factors most affect recessions. However, most of these analyses until after the recent financial crisis were evaluated only by goodness of fit, and not on forward prediction ability. The authors suggest the ROC method pioneered in economics by Berge and Jorda, which involves plotting a model's 'Receiver Operating Characteristic' curve, and graphically analysing the result. The ROC method, which was originated in a 1953 paper by Birdsall and Peterson, apparently only became widely used in economics in the wake of the most recent recession; analyses using this technique often focus on the area under the ROC curve (AUROC), which gives an overall score of effectiveness for a model for several thresholds of defining a recession, as opposed to one only.

However, increasingly, 'agent-based' models are being proposed, which focus on predicting the behaviour of individuals rather than using statistical analysis of overarching macroeconomic figures as in the models above. Korobeinikov (2009) introduces a dynamical approach to modelling financial crises. Although he admits in his conclusion that "this model is a great oversimplification and lacks many features of a real economy... One hardly can expect that a precise or reasonably accurate quantitative description for such a process is possible at all", his model reproduces several interesting features. It centres around the interacting values $x$ (the 'financially healthy' population) and $y$ (the 'financially unhealthy' population). He posits the governing equations \\

$\dot{x} = -\beta x y^{\alpha}$

$\dot{y} = \beta x y^{\alpha}-y/\sigma$,

where $\alpha$ represents the average number of 'unhealthy' individuals a healthy individual must meet to become 'unhealthy', $\beta$ is some activity coefficient, and $\sigma$ is the average time period for which an individual remains unhealthy. The author claims (with curiously little support for his assertion) that most economies have $\alpha$ between $1$ and $2$, which suggests that diversification of investment bases is often a viable way to reduce the impact of crises (note that the larger the value of $\alpha$, the slower the crisis spreads, and so the less impact it has). This is a key instance of (fairly mathematically involved) 'agent-based' modelling, based on considering individuals within an economy; however, it lacks credible testing on empirical data.

Another agent-based model, looking specifically at leveraging, is presented by Thurner, Farmer and Geanakoplos (2009), which leads to the intriguing result that if every firm in the economy acts to reduce its risk, it can produce an unintended consequence in which the overall risk in the economy rises, increasing the number of defaults; this arises due to nonlinear feedback on prices. Since leverage adjustments tend to be clustered in short periods around sudden crises, this can easily be realised in the real world; the authors propose that governmental co-ordination may be necessary to avoid this collective amplification of risk, both in leveraging and in the trading of many other financial instruments. This is also a clear ethical issue which mathematicians working in finance ought to be aware of. 

It has been argued that modelling financial crises is ultimately an impossible task – given that they arise essentially from panic and uncertainty in certain markets, the existence of any model that could reliably predict a crisis would immediately nullify such panic, removing the cause of the crisis in the first place. (Intriguingly, this suggests that if someone, say the government, credibly claimed to be able to predict future recessions, \textit{even if they couldn't}, it may increase market confidence to a sufficient degree to ward it off. Of course, this is essentially impossible in practice.) Fundamentally, one must bear in mind that in macroeconomics, predictions can easily affect that which they seek to predict.

This does, however, raise an important ethical consideration: the economy is an intricate network of feedback loops and circular implications, and as such it is easy for predictions of the future to change the future they are predicting. In trying to predict a recession, a well-intentioned mathematician might instead cause one, say if people suddenly become unconfident in their predictions. The economy, unlike mathematics, is no realm of perfect logic.
