---
Title: COMPAS
Template: ListSubPages
---

# WIP. REQUIRE TEMPLATE THAT ACCEPTS TEX

### COMPAS

COMPAS is a risk assessment tool originally created by Tim Brennan in 1988.[1] It takes data from both a questionnaire presented to an arrested individual and an interview performed with them[2] to output recidivism risk in deciles.[1]
Originally intended to be used as a tool to help determine probation periods[3], COMPAS is now employed in several states to augment a judge's decision determining sentence lengths, notably in Wisconsin.[4]

### ACCURACY

The Pr. Gu.[1] indicates that COMPAS gathers 5 main aggregate data points from its input and performs a weighted average of these scores, so that your risk $R$ is given by

$$R=\sum_{n=1}^Nw_nx_n$$

The weights $w_i$ are created manually to try and optimise the accuracy of the program, although it is unclear if any statistical analysis or even machine learning is used here. A 2018 paper[5] found that even with only two variables, the authors' own algorithm can approximate the accuracy of COMPAS.
Furthermore, 400 humans from Amazon's Mechanical Turk were asked to perform the same task as COMPAS (guessing if a convict will (violently) commit an offence) using the same information that COMPAS had available, and managed to also have approximately the same accuracy as COMPAS.[5]

### FAIRNESS

ProPublica has published multiple articles criticizing the fairness of COMPAS. Here, fairness specifically refers to disproportionately classifying people of one race as recidivists or violent recidivists despite being similar to members of another race. That is to say, the algorithm being racist. While COMPAS itself doesn't take race as a factor in its data, it does have input the postcode and family history of a convict. In many areas of America, neighbourhoods are heavily segregated by race, and the history of one's family being arrested can be used as a proxy for someone's race.

### PROPUBLCIA ANALYSIS

ProPublica’s analysis of COMPAS (Julia Angwin, n.d.) makes use of datasets obtained from the
Broward County sheriff’s office in Florida detailing risk scores assigned to defendants prior to trial as
well as sentencing statistics for the county. It consists of two main tests.
The first test involved fitting a logistic regression model to the data and looking at how individual
features are weighted in the model to study their correlation with high COMPAS scores, adjusting for
controlling for variation amongst classes in the population. From this ProPublica were able to
conclude that women are 19% more likely than men to be predicted high recidivism scores, black
defendants are 45% more likely, and defendants younger than 25 are 250% more likely.
The same test was done looking at scores for violent recidivism. Black defendants were 77.3% more
likely to receive a high score and young defendants were found to be 640% more likely.
The second statistical technique was a Cox proportional hazard model, the same test used by
Northpointe in their analysis of COMPAS’ effectiveness. On the whole ProPublica found less
significant scores from the test, although Northpointe dispute the correctness of ProPublica’s
methods (William Dieterich, 2016).

### WISCONSIN V LOOMIS

## VERBATIM COMPAS_Maria_summary.pdf

In 2013, Mr. Loomis was arrested and accused of driving a car that had been
used in a shooting. The judge gave him a six-year prison term, stating that he
arrived at this decision in part because of Loomis’ score generated by COMPAS,
which indicated that he was “high risk” to the community. Loomis challenged
his sentence, arguing that [2] :
• the proprietary nature of the COMPAS software prevented him from as-
sessing the accuracy of the score
• it violated his right to an individualised sentence as it relied on information
about the characteristics of a larger group to make an inference about his
personal likelihood to commit future crimes
• it used gender as a variable improperly in calculating the score
Ultimately, the court rejected Loomis’ claims [4] and held that COMPAS could
be used at sentencing, but prescribed key limitations for its use: the score
can help a judge understand a defendant’s situation but should not be used to
determine length or severity of punishment, and should definitely not be used
as “an official aggravating factor” [2] in the sentencing decision. Judge Shirley
Abrahamson noted that the lack of understanding about COMPAS and how it
works was a “significant problem” in this case.


# WIP BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1] “Practitioners Guide To COMPAS.” FieldGuide2_081412.pdf, August 17, 2012. http://www.northpointeinc.com/files/technical_documents/FieldGuide2_081412.pdf.
[2] Angwin (ProPublica), Julia. “Sample COMPAS Risk-Assessment Questions.” Accessed August 6, 2018. https://www.propublica.org/documents/item/2702103-Sample-Risk-Assessment-COMPAS-CORE.
[3] Brennan, Tim, William Dieterich, and Beate Ehret. “Evaluating the Predictive Validity of the Compas Risk and Needs Assessment System.” Criminal Justice and Behavior 36, no. 1 (January 2009): 21–40. https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854808326545.
[4] J, ANN WALSH BRADLEY. “STATE v. LOOMIS | 881 N.W.2d 749 (2016) | By ANN... | 20160713i48| Leagle.Com.” Leagle. Accessed August 6, 2018. https://www.leagle.com/decision/inwico20160713i48.
[5] Dressel, Julia & Farid, Hany. (2018). The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. Science Advances. 4. eaao5580. 10.1126/sciadv.aao5580. 
