---

Title: Superintelligence

Template: ListSubPages

---


**Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies** by Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom : In his book, Bostrom talks about the "intelligence explosion" that will occur when machines which are more intelligent than humans begin to design machines of their own. The general point that the book is trying to push is summarised nicely by Tim Adams, who wrote an article for the Guardian following an interview with Bostrom,	"If we create a machine intelligence superior to our own, and then give it freedom to grow and learn through access to the internet, there is no reason to suggest that it will not evolve strategies to secure its dominance, just as in the biological world." Whilst 'Superintelligence' contains some important philosophical and ethical points about why we should be careful about AI and the creation of superintelligence, the book is purely speculative and not aimed at mathematicians - despite being endorsed by many technically minded people. In Chapter 4, there is some 'mathematics' which 'analyses the kinetics of the transition to superintelligence as a function of optimisation power and system recalitrance,' defining

	$$\text{rate of change of intelligence}=\frac{\text{optimisation power}}{\text{recalitrance}}.$$
	
Questionable assumptions are made to make the differential equation very easy to solve, and the conclusion that intelligence will grow at least exponentially is reached. Using mathematics in this way (making naive assumptions to get the desired result) makes the conclusions reaches seem stronger than they actually are by non-mathematically trained people, and goes no way to encouraging mathematically minded people to think about the issue because they can't take it seriously. Further to this, on page 123 the following scenario is presented:

 ***Riemann Hypothesis Catastrophe***

*An AI, given the final goal of evaluation the Riemann Hypothesis, pursues this goal by transforming the Solar System into "computronium" (physical resources arranged in a way that is optimised for computation) - including the atoms in the bodies of whomever once cared about the answer*

The overarching issue is an important one, that given a goal an AI will do anything within its capabilities to achieve it. Essentially, it will cheat because it hasn't been told not to. However, presenting the point in this way makes it very difficult to take seriously (especially since the Riemann Hypothesis cannot be "evaluated'). 

Setting aside the wild claims and suppositions, the book takes a dim view towards mathematics. With regards to the Fields Medal, on page 255 Bostrom quotes a friend say that receiving a Fields Medal tells us that the recipient "was capable of accomplishing something important, and that he didn't" and goes on to talk about the "value that a world-class mathematical mind could have generated by working on something else." This would be a bold claim even if no Fields medalist had been involved in artificial intelligence. However, 2010 Fields Medalist Cédric Villani, who is also a member of the Frence Parliament disproves Bostrom's point in a very elegant fashion. In 2018 (admittedly after 'Superintelligence' was published) Villani published a document entitled 'For a Meaninful Artificial Intelligence' which gives details of a French and European Strategy for AI. We will discuss this in more detail later. However, it's worth mentioning here because Villani proves that AI is an issue for mathematicians, and the reading material available on ethics in AI needs to reflect that.
	

